Cannot be worked from first principles. What would be another way to "always be one step from a safe place
knowledge-wise"?

recap:
- one new thing at a time
- connect to already-known things
- immediately support with exercises, even if it just repeats the content
- smalls steps in multiple directions, not several steps into the unknown
    - then connect and support each other
- repeat previous, if possible from different angles
- open question or unknown aspect as motivation
- combination exercise

With this in mind, process the videos:

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

layout: start with drawing with numbers for every feature
    do this outside the shop; you will make mistakes in the shop because of the things happening around you

use case for layout fluid ("spray paint")?
    + scratch through it to mark lines, points, circles etc.

what happens when you spray too much layout fluid on a piece
    + scratching through it scratches off flakes instead of a thin, precise line

how does a scriber draw a line?
    + it scratches off a thin line of layout fluid

straight line -> straight edge + scriber

perpendicular line -> square + scriber

parallel line -> parallels (metal plates with two parallel straight edges) + scriber

circular arc -> compass (one of the legs acts as a scriber)
    first mark the center point with a center punch

which parallels must be combined to draw a line parallel to the edge of a part, at a distance of XXX?

things to watch out for with parallels:
    + all parallels in contact

line thickness: 2/1000th in = 0.05 mm
    wrong answers: 2mm, 1mm, 0.5mm

advantage of a ruler: quick to use
disadvantage of a ruler: not very accurate

how to mark a point?
+ intersection of two lines ("scribe an X")

mark a point to drill a hole with a scriber or with a center punch?
    + both, first scriber to "find" the point, then center punch

why mark a point with a center punch when it has already been marked with a scriber?

how can (even inaccurate) marks help in a machine with digital readouts?
    + easy to see when you are totally off, e.g. flipped digits or decimal point in wrong place

how to position the center punch accurately?
    + magnifying glass

use case for transfer punches?
    mark points at the location of holes of an existing parts
    - for through-holes
    - for threaded blind holes
    - for unthreaded blind holes

If position of the holes in the part don't matter, why clamp parts together when marking points with transfer punches?
    Absolute position of holes doesn't matter, but position of the holes relative to each other does.

Threaded transfer punches: Why screw them in until just the point sticks out? What happens if more than the point
    sticks out?
    + will lift and tilt the part and give inaccurate punch marks

adv/disadv of plotting a drawing and glueing it to sheet metal?
    adv: very fast; harder to make mistakes
    disasv: not very accurate
use this in which case?
    -> accurace not as important

-------
DRILL PRESS

advantage of a drill press over a hand drill
    + drill exactly perpendicular to the surface
    - stronger
    - larger holes
    - drill deeper

what do the levers for the transmission change?
    + speed by which the drill bit rotates
    - hole size
    - hole depth
    - speed by which the drill moves down
    - speed by which the drill moves up

what does the power feed do?
    + moves the drill down automatically and at a constant speed

what is the main advantage of the power feed
    + pushes the drill down at a constant speed. When pushing by hand, you push in varying speeds and force, and can
      easily push down too hard and break the drill bit or even the drill press.
    - can do something else in the meantime
    - relax a bit in the meantime

when is the power feed especially useful to avoid breaking the drill bit or drill press?
    + when drilling a large-diameter hole

use of a center finder?
    + makes sure the axis of the drill is not moved against the axis of the hole to drill
    - makes sure the axis of the drill is not tilted against the axis of the hole to drill, that is, that the drill is
        exactly perpendicular to the surface
    - makes sure that the tip of the drill is in contact with the surface to drill

what to watch out for with a center finder
    + do not pull down too hard; just enough to maintain contact with the surface

what happens if you pull down too hard?
    the quill deflects, and the center finder will not show the displacement of the two axes accurately

how to choose drill size?
    + start with a center drill, then step up size until the desired hole size is reached

what happens if you choose a large drill too early?

what happens if you start with a small drill instead of a center drill?
    + the drill will wander off the center of the hole to drill, essentially drilling in the wrong place, because it
        is thin and flexible, so it needs the hole from the center drill to stay in its place

When tapping a hole (cutting threads into it), why would you want to use the spindle of the drill press to guide the
tap?
    + to cut the threads perpendicular to the surface

What to watch out for when guiding the tap with the spindle?
    + pull the drill press down firmly enough so the tap does not slip out. With the part clamped down, it is easy to
      break the tap that way.

What is the purpose of cutting fluid?
    + lubricate the cutting edge to reduce unnecessary friction
    + lubricate the sides of the drill, so the chips slide along the flutes and do not get stuck in them
    - cool the drill

What should you do when you hear chatter (vibration) when operating the drill?
    + reduce the drill speed
    - add cutting fluid

What should you do when you cannot switch the transmission?
    + rotate the spindle slightly by hand, until the gear teeth slide past each other

Why can't you use a drill press for milling?
    + because the quill of the drill press is too flexible for milling. It will deflect and not cut an even surface.


-----
ADD
----

safety glasses




